Paper: Modernizing computing by structural biologists with Jupyter and Colab (#635)
scipy-conference/scipy_proceedings: papers/blaine_mooers/mooersblaine.rst

This modularization of the project should ease the correction and augmentation of individual libraries as the extensions, and structural biology software packages evolve.
We only provided libraries for JupyterLab because the Jupyter Project plans to phase out support for the Jupyter Notebook software.
Among the several alternative extensions for code snippets in JupyterLab, we choose jupyterlab-snippets [jLsnip]_ and Elyra [Elyra]_ because these two extensions are actively maintained and have different features.
We also support a snippet library for Juptyer notebooks on Google Colab as described below because Colab provides access to GPUs, which can accelerate some of the larger computational tasks.

jupyterlab-snippets extension
******************************

The jupyterlab-snippets extension adds a snippet menu to the JupyterLab menu bar.
The user accesses the snippets through a cascading pulldown menu.
Each snippet resides in a separate plain text file without any formatting.
This feature dramatically eases adding new snippets by users and eases keeping the snippets under version control.

> The snippets are stored in the Jupyter data directory (which is found by entering :code:`jupyter --path`; it is in ~/Library/Jupyter/snippets).

Reviewer: `~/Library/Jupyter/snippets` must be on Mac OS?

Author: Modified by adding Mac OS.

Each snippet library is stored in a separate subfolder, which appears on the menu bar as a part of a cascading pulldown menu (Figure :ref:`snippetCascade`). 

.. figure:: snippetCascade.png 

   Cacading pull-down menu for the Juptyer categories of the jupyterlabpymolsnips library. :label:`snippetCascade`

We clustered snippets into categories. 
Each category has a cascading submenu.
Clicking on a snippet name in the submenu triggers its insertion into the current cell in the notebook.
The nested menu hierarchy serves well the user who is familiar with the content of the snippet libraries.

> Like most other snippet extnesions for Jupyter Notebook and JupyterLab, the jupyterlab-snippets externsion does not support tab stops nor tab triggers.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Like most other snippet extnesions for Jupyter Notebook and JupyterLab, the jupyterlab-snippets extension does not support tab stops or tab triggers.
```

These are common features of snippet libraries for most text editors and IDEs that accelerate the editing of parameter values in snippets.
The tab stops are particularly valuable because they direct the user to sites that may need changes in their parameter values and they guide the user to all of the site to ensure that none are overlooked.
The overlooking of parameter values that require changing can be a major source of bugs.
The tab triggers are also often mirrored, so a change at one instance of the same parameter will be propagate automatically to other identical instances of the parameter.

> To compensate for the lack of tab triggers, we inlcude a second copy of the code in the same snippet but in a comment and with the tab triggers marked with curly braces and numbers (Figure :ref:`compareSnips`).

Reviewer: typo `include`

Author: Thank you @stargraser. Typo is fixed.

The user uses the code in the comment to direct their editing of the active code.
The user can delete the commented out comment when they have finished editing.
Separate versions of the libraries were made with commented out code.
These versions are distinguished by having "plus" appended to their names.

.. figure:: compareSnips.png 

   Comparison of active snippet at the bottom and commented out snippet at the top. The snippet at the top serves as a guide for editing because it has curly braces marking sites to be edited. :label:`compareSnips`

elyra-code-snippet extension
****************************

A menu icon labeled with `</>` provides access to snippets in the elyra-code-snippet-extension system.
After the icon is clicked, the snippets appear in the left margin of the JupyterLab GUI.
Snippets from all libraries appear in alphabetical order. 
The user can scroll through the list of snippets.
Hovering the mouse cursor over the snippet's name triggers the display of a description of the snippet.

.. figure:: hbondsElyra.png 

>    This is yet another the caption. :label:`hbondElyra`

Reviewer: Suggest "snippets in the elyra-code-snippet extension"

Author: Did as suggested.

Alternatively, the user can enter a search term in the search box at the top of the menu to reduce the list of snippets.
The search terms can be part of a snippet name or a tag stored with each snippet.

A tag icon displays all of the available tags in the snippets as separate icons.
The user can select tags to be used to choose snippets by clicking on the icons.

> Each snippet is displayed with several icons (Figure).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Each snippet is displayed with several icons (Figure :ref:`hbondElyra`).
```

The markdown cell listed these installation steps.
Then a series of code snippets contained the code for carrying out the steps.
This installation snippet was the only one in a notebook that contained more then one code snippet.

.. figure:: ColabPyMOL.png 

   Code snippet for installing PyMOL on Colab. The <> icon opens a menu on the left side that lists all of the snippets. The search term 'pymol' was used to reduce the list of candidate snippets. The highlighted snippets name 'Install PyMOL is new Colab notebook'. Selecting this snippets opens the snippet below. The snippet description is displayed followed by the seven blocks of code. The description includes the seven steps for installing the molecular graphics programs. Clicking with the mouse cursor on 'INSERT' in blue inserts the code into in the cells on the notebook on the fight. :label:`ColabPyMOL`

A search box at the top of the list of snippets is used to recover a snippet (Figure :ref:`ColabPyMOL`.
The user enters a snippet name in the search box to display the snippet and its documentation.
The user hits the 'Install' button to install the snippet's code at the current position in the  notebook.

> Unlike the Elyra snippets which insert a whole snippet into one code block, a Colab snippet can have multiple code blocks that are inseted into the notebook at the current position of the mouse cursor.

Reviewer: typo -> `inserted`

Author: Corrected.

One snippet can have different types of code blocks.
For example, the snippet in Figure :ref:`ColabPyMOL` has a three blocks of Python code, two blocks of shell commands, and two blocks of bash cell majics with multiple lines of bash commands.

The list snippet for a library will print in a table below the current cell a list of the snippets in the library and a brief description. 

> This table is stored in a panda's dataframe that can be searched with the panda's search function. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This table is stored in a pandas dataframe that can be searched with the panda's search function. 
```

Author: Thank you for catching this typo! Correction made.

This table can also be searched for key terms with the search function in the notebook.
The code block and output can be hidden by clicking on the three blue dots on the left margin of the cell. 

> Notebooks on Colab open lighting fast, but the user must reinstall their software on each login.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Notebooks on Colab open very quickly, but the user must reinstall their software on each login.
```

The Phenix project greatly eased the incorporation of simulated annealing into crystal structure refinement by hiding the tedious preparation of the required parameter files from the user.
The PDB file does not have sufficient information about chemical bonding for MD simulations.
The molecular dynamics software that carries out the simulated annealing requires two parameter files and the coordinate file.
The preparation and debugging of the parameter files manually take many hours, but Phenix automates this takes.

Simulated annealing involves molecular dynamics simulation at high temperatures to move parts of a molecular model out of local energy minima and into conformations that fit the experimental data better.
Twenty minutes of applying simulated annealing to an early model that still has numerous errors can significantly improve the model while saving the user a day or more of the tedious manual rebuilding of the molecular model. 

More recently, Phenix has been extended to refine crystal structures with neutron diffraction data and for structure determination and refinement with cryo-electron microscopy (cryo-EM) data.

> The addition of support for cryo-EM help address the recent need for the ability to fit atomic models to cryo-EM maps that have recently become available at near atomic resolution because of the dramatic imprvoements in detector technology []_.

Reviewer: typo  -> `improvements`, and need to complete the reference.

Users can interact with Phenix via a GUI interface or the command line, as mentioned before, but users can also use PHIL, domain-specific language scripting language for more precise parameter settings for Phenix. 
In addition, users can use the :code:`phenix.python` interpreter. Unfortunately, the phenix.python interpreter is still limited to Python2, whereas CCTBX has been available for Python3 for over a year.

Jupyter Lab and its extensions are also best run with Python3.
The most practical approach to using Phenix in Jupyter Lab is to invoke Phenix by utilizing the shell rather than using Python.

> For example, the command shown below invokes statistical analysis of the B-factors in a Protein Data Bank (PDB) file by using one line of code in the shell (Figure :figure:XXXXXX).

Reviewer: I think the figure is not needed; just move the bash code-block closer to this paragraph.

The output can be copied and pasted into a new cell and then reformatted in markdown as a table or the copied output be used as input data to make a plot with matplotlib.
While these are basic data science tasks, they are intimidating to new users of Jupyter and some of the details are easy for more experienced users to forget.
To overcome this problem, we supply snippets that demonstrate how to transform the output and that can be used as templates by the users.  

These commands are becoming harder to find as the on-line documentation has been migrating to serving only the GUI interface.
The bash script files that run the phenix commands can be found by running 

.. code-block:: bash

    !ls /Applications/phenix-*/build/bin/phenix.\*

These shell scripts invoke Python scripts that capture the command line arguments and pass them to the phenix Python interpreter.

.. code-block:: bash

    ls /Applications/phenix-1.19.2-4158/modules/phenix/phenix/command_line/*.py.

.. figure:: figure1.png

   This is yet another the caption. 

.. table:: Table of libraries. :label:`mtable`

   +--------------------+-----------------------------------+

>    | Programs           | url                               |

Reviewer: URLs are incomplete.

   +--------------------+-----------------------------------+
   | Native Patterson   |                                   |
   +--------------------+-----------------------------------+
   | Normal probability |                                   |
   +--------------------+-----------------------------------+
   | Phenix             |                                   |
   +--------------------+-----------------------------------+
   | CCTBX Xray         |                                   |
   +--------------------+-----------------------------------+
   | Prody              |                                   |
   +--------------------+-----------------------------------+
   | Chimera            |                                   |
   +--------------------+-----------------------------------+
   | ChimeraX           |                                   |
   +--------------------+-----------------------------------+
   | CCTBX pdb          |                                   |
   +--------------------+-----------------------------------+
   | Cement             | :math:`\alpha`                    |
   +--------------------+-----------------------------------+

> JupyterLab snippets

Reviewer: several empty sections headings and two figures should be removed.

*******************

Elyra snippets
**************

Colab library
*************

Script to install PyMOL in Colab
********************************

Table of tutorial Jupyter Notebooks
***********************************

.. figure:: figure1.png

   This is yet another the caption. 

Help resource on GitHub
***********************

.. table:: Table of tutorial jupyter notebooks. :label:`jnbtable`

>    +------------------------+-----------------------------------+

Reviewer: notebook names are empty

The audience for these libraries are millions of professional programmers and web page developers.
We reasoned that this great tool should be brought to the aid of the thousands of workers in crystallography.

The other area where domain specific snippets have been provided is in molecular graphics.
The pioneering work on a scripting wizard provided templates for use in RasMol [Hort99]_.
The conscript program provided a converter from RasMol to PyMOL [Mott10]_.
Language converters for translating code between the leading molecular graphics programs would allow users to more easily find and use the optimal molecular graphics program for the task at hand.

We also provided snippets for PyMOL, which has 100,000 users, for use in text editors [Moo21a]_ and Juptyer Notebooks [Moo21b]_.
The former support tab triggers and tab stops; the latter does not.

The libraries have to be molecular graphics program specific because molecular graphics programs have been written in a range of programming languages.
The user issues the commands in either in a general programming language like Python or a a domain specific language (DSL) like pml.

> To counter this growing tower of babel, the XXXXXX intiative was formed cite. 

Reviewer: What is the initiative?

           
.. [jLsnip] https://github.com/QuantStack/jupyterlab-snippets
           
.. [Lieb11] D. Liebschner, P.V. Afonine, M.L. Baker, G. Bunkóczi, V.B. Chen, T.I. Croll, B. Hintze, L.-W. Hung, S. Jain, A.J. McCoy, N.W. Moriarty, R.D. Oeffner, B.K. Poon, M G. Prisant, R.J. Read, J.S. Richardson, D.C. Richardson, M.D. Sammito, O.V. Sobolev, D.H. Stockwell, T.C. Terwilliger, A.G. Urzhumtsev, L.L. Videau, C.J. Williams, and P.D. Adams. 
           *Macromolecular structure determination using X-rays, neutrons and electrons: recent developments in Phenix*,
           Acta Cryst., D75(10), 861-877, October 2019.
           doi: 10.1107/S2059798319011471
           
.. [Mana21] K. Manalastas-Cantos, P.V. Konarev, N.R. Hajizadeh, A.G. Kikhney, M.V. Petoukhov, D.S. Molodenskiy, A. Panjkovich, H.D.T. Mertens, A. Gruzinov, C. Borges, M. Jeffries, D.I. Sverguna, and D. Franke.
           *ATSAS 3.0: expanded functionality and new tools for small-angle scattering data analysis*,
           J. Appl. Cryst., 54(1):343–355, February 2021.
           doi: 10.1107/S1600576720013412
           
.. [Mott10] S.E. Mottarella, M. Rosa, A. Bangura, H.J. Bernstein, and P.A. Craig.

>             *Conscript: RasMol to PyMOL script converter*,

Reviewer: the extra space seems to cause a problem when building the paper.

Author: Corrected. Solved problem with compiling.
